---
meta:
    author: Emma Krebs
    topic: Symplectic Integrations
    course: TN Tech PHYS4130
    term: Spring 2026
---

# Symplectic Integrations

## Types of Integrations

- Introduce topic. Explain different times of intergrations and how that effects the error, precision, and most importantly how to conserve energy in problems.
- Explain why conserving energy is very important, give examples of programs that its important in (orbits, etc)
- Introduce your program, working with simple harmonic motion, the equations and derivatives from your main source.
- Explain how simple harmonic motion is a useful system to understand because of applications.

### What is Harmonic Oscillation and What Does it Look Like?

The main system we studied with these methods of integration was harmonic oscillation, which is defined to be a system that experiences a restoring force proportional to its displacement towards an equilibirum point. Some classical examples of this are mass springs and pendulums, where the restoring forces are from the spring and gravity, respectively. However, the harmonic oscillator is even more important to physics than just describing these simple examples because any mass subject to a force in stable equilibrium acts as a harmonic oscillator in small vibrations. Therefore, there are many physical phenomenon we can apply this system to, such as: quantum's potential wells, orbital perturbations, stellar oscillations, and more. 

### Symplectic Integration

- Explain what symplectic integration is and the function you used, what it does good at.
- Include image showing the process the function goes through with midpoints. Include equation of calculation it does.
- Show image it produces, the one generated by your program from different w terms and dampening.
- Explain why this makes sense.
- Talk about linear dampending (spiral!)

### RK45

RK45, also known as Runge–Kutta–Fehlberg method, is an adapative numerical technique for solving ODEs. It uses intermediate calculations to produce two estimates of different accuracy. By doing this, it can adjust the time step sizes for high accuracy and efficiency. These technqiues have a range of different orders you can use for a probelm. In this case, RK45 computes a 4th and 5th order error estimate while RK2 would be a lower order with only a 2nd order estimate. Although RK45 excels at accuracy, it does not maintain the geometrical properties of the phase space, so it loses total energy from small numerical errors over time.

The function definition in the code is shown as:



- Explain what the RK45 function is, what it does good at, and how it compares to the work we previously did with RK2.
- Include image showing the process the function goes through with midpoints. Include equation of calculation it does.
- Explain the snippet of code for Rk45 and how you set it up, what it does with its arguments, etc.
- Talk about linear dampending 

### Odeint
- Explain what the Odent function is and what it does better than the other 
- Include image showing the process the function goes through with midpoints. Include equation of calculation it does.
- Explain the snippet of code for Odeint and how you set it up, what it does with its arguments, etc.
- Talk about linear dampending 

### Final Comparison
- Create a graph with all three functions and compare the differences between them. Summarizing basically.
- Here you will also talk about the T+V energy conservation (but more on that after I do the extensions).

## Extensions

### Virial Theorem
- The one I probabaly want to do the most
- Planning to do gravity (If I have time I will do second system)

## Languages, Libraries, Lessons Learned

- Scipy library is a big one
- Energy conservation in programs
- More about 

## Timekeeping

4/1: 18 hours

## Sources

Main Source: https://math.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Differential_Equations/Numerically_Solving_Ordinary_Differential_Equations_(Brorson)/07%3A_Symplectic_integrators 
